docs/frontend-protocol.rst, before:


.. _frontend-protocol:

The ``fowld`` Frontend Protocol
================================

**Target Audience**: users of ``fowld`` (integrators, GUI authors, experimenters)

The ``fowld`` program speaks a line-based protocol on stdin and stdout.

Our intent is to allow any language to use and experiment with Dilation via local streaming interfaces; if a feature for your use-case is missing please `open a new Issue <https://github.com/meejah/fowl/issues/new>`_.

Every message is a single line, terminated with a single newline (``\n``) character.
Every message is a complete and valid JSON message, encoded in UTF8.
Every message is a ``dict`` (aka "JSON object").

Thus, controller programs can deserialize each line as a ``dict`` (or mapping, or your language's equivalent).

Since ``fowl`` itself uses ``fowld`` under the hood, this project has examples of parsing and producing these messages.

We now go over the keys that particular messages have.


The ``"kind"`` Key
--------------------

Every single message MUST have a ``"kind"`` key.
This tells the parser what sort of message it is (and hence what other keys may be present).

It is a protocol error to emit a message without a ``"kind"`` key.
Hereafter, we refer to all messages by their "kind".

An "input" message is one that ``fowld`` accepts on stdin.

An "output" message is one that ``fowld`` may produce on stdout.

To follow along in the code, see the ``fowl.messages`` package.
Types derived from ``FowlOutputMessage`` are produced on stdout and ``FowlCommandMessage`` derived types are accepted on stdin.


Input: ``kind: allocate-code``
------------------------------

This message tells ``fowld`` to allocate a fresh code.
These codes look like ``1-foo-bar`` (you can control how many words).
Note that we interact with the server to reserve the "nameplate" (the short number) but the words are chosen locally (and randomly).

Keys allowed:

- ``code-length`` (optional): how many words to use

After issuing this command, at some point in the future a ``kind: code-allocated`` message will be emitted.


Input: ``kind: set-code``
-------------------------

Tell ``fowld`` a specific code to use.
This likely came from a corresponding use of ``kind: allocate-code`` (in another instance of ``fowld`` on another computer).

- ``code`` (required): the secret code to use


Input: ``kind: local``
----------------------

This message asks ``fowld`` to start listening on a local port -- any subsequent connections on this local port cause the *remote* side to open a corresponding connection (possibly on a different port or protocol).

Keys allowed in this message:

- ``listen`` (required): a Twisted server-style endpoint string specifying where to listen locally
- ``connect`` (required): a Twisted client-style endpoint string specifying what connection to open on the other end

For example:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "kind": "local",
        "listen": "tcp:8000:interface=localhost",
        "connect": "tcp:localhost:80"
    }

In this example, we will open a listener on our machine on TCP port ``8000`` and interface ``localhost``.
Whenever a new connection is opened on our machine, we will ask the other side to connect to port ``80`` on *their* notion of ``localhost``.

Remember that these can be anything that Twisted understands, including from installed plugins.
**Be careful**: a malicious "other end" could cause all sorts of shenanigans.

You are only limited to streaming endpoints (i.e. no UDP) but they do not have to be TCP.
For example, one side could use ``unix:/tmp/socket`` to open a listener (or connection) on Unix-domain socket.
With `txtorcon <https://meejah.ca/projects/txtorcon>`_ one could have ``onion:...`` Tor endpoints on either end.

Once the listener is established, we'll issue a ``kind: listening`` output.


Input: ``kind: remote``
-----------------------

This will cause ``fowld`` to request a listener on the *other* side.
There is symmetry here: the same thing could be accomplished by that other side instead issuing a ``kind: local`` request.

Keys allowed in this message:

- ``listen`` (required): a Twisted server-style endpoint string specifying where to listen (on the other end).
- ``connect`` (required): a Twisted client-style endpoint string specifying what to connect to (on this side) for each connection that happens on the other side.

To directly mirror the example from the ``local`` command:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "kind": "remote",
        "listen": "tcp:8000:interface=localhost",
        "connect": "tcp:localhost:80"
    }

This will be a mirror-image of the other example.
That is, we'll cause the far end to start listening on its TCP port ``8000`` on interface ``localhost``.
Any connection to that will open a near-side connection to port 80 via TCP.

The far-side ``fowld`` will issue a ``kind: listening`` message (on its side) when it has started listening.


Input: ``kind: grant-permission``
---------------------------------

This asks ``fowld`` to append more ports to those allowed for listening and connecting.
By default, no ports are allowed.
Only "``localhost``" (or ``::1``) interfaces (or destinations) are allowed.

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "kind": "grant-permission",
        "listen": [8080],
        "connect": [443, 4321]
    }

This will allow a listener on port 8080 (whether initiated remotely or locally), and allow connections to ``localhost:443`` and ``localhost:4321`` for any incoming forwarded connections.

This is a simple, easy-to-use API but does not reveal all that is possible technically; if the above doesn't fit your use-case, please get in touch by `creating a new Issue <>_`.


Input: ``kind: danger-disable-permission-check``
------------------------------------------------

To facilitate experimentation or other use-cases not available via any other permission API, checking can be turned off entirely.

.. DANGER::

   Please understand the implications before enabling this, especially if you do not control both peer computers.
   This allows the OTHER peer to open any listener or any connection they like on your machine -- very useful, but easily abused if either side is malicious in any way.

If you understand that you want this anyway for your side of the connection, send this message

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "kind": "danger-disable-permission-check",
    }


Output: ``kind: listening``
---------------------------

This message is issued by ``fowld`` when it has opened a listening socket on that side.

So, if a ``kind: local`` had initiated the listening, this message would appear on that same side.
If instead it was a ``kind: remote`` then it would appear on the far side.

An example message:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "kind": "listening",
        "listen": "tcp:8080:interface=localhost",
        "connect": "tcp:80"
    }

Guidance for UX: the user should be made aware their machine is listening on a particular port / interface.


Output: ``kind: error``
-----------------------

Some sort of error has happened.

This message MUST have a ``message`` key containing a free-form error message.

An example message:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "kind": "error",
        "message": "Unknown control command: foo"
    }

Guidance for UX: most errors are probably interesting to the user.


Output: ``kind: welcome``
------------------------

This message is emitted to both sides once per session when we connect to the Mailbox Server.

- ``"welcome"``: a ``dict`` containing whatever the Mailbox server sent in its Welcome message.

Guidance for UX: the user should be informed that progress has been made (e.g. the Mailbox Server is available).


Output: ``kind: code-allocated``
--------------------------------

This is emitted once ``fowld`` has a secret code.
We could have been given one with ``kind: set-code`` or created a new one with ``kind: allocate-code``.
In either case, this message is emitted.

- ``"code"``: the secret code


Output: ``kind: peer-connected``
--------------------------------

The ``fowld`` process has successfully communicated with the other peer.

  - ``"verifier"``: a string containing 32 hex-encoded bytes which are a hash of the session key
  - ``"versions"``: an object containing application-specific versioning information

Guidance for UX: advanced users may wish to compare the verifiers for extra security (they should match; if they don't, it may be a "Machine in the Middle" attack).

Guidance for integration: the "versions" metadata is intended to allow your application to determine information about the peer.
This could be use for capability discovery, protocol selection, or anything else.


Output: ``kind: bytes-in``
--------------------------

The ``fowld`` process received some forwarded bytes successfully.

Keys present:

- ``id`` (required): the sub-connection id, a unique number
- ``bytes`` (required): how many bytes are forwarded recently

Guidance for UX: the user may be curious to know if a connection is alive, what its throughput is, etc.


Output: ``kind: bytes-out``
---------------------------

The ``fowld`` process forwarded some bytes to the other peer successfully.

Keys present:

- ``id`` (required): the sub-connection id, a unique number
- ``bytes`` (required): how many bytes are forwarded recently

Guidance for UX: the user may be curious to know if a connection is alive, what its throughput is, etc.


Output: ``kind: local-connection``
----------------------------------

We have received a connection on one of our local listeners.

Keys present:

- ``id`` (required): the sub-connection id, a unique number

Guidance for UX: the user should be informed that something is interacting with our listener.


Output: ``kind: incoming-connection``
-------------------------------------

The other side has asked us to make a local connection.

Keys present:

- ``id`` (required): the sub-connection id, a unique number
- ``endpoint`` (required): the Twisted client-style endpoint we will attempt a connection to

Guidance for UX: the user should be informed that something is interacting with our listener.

Commit message:

docs: deduplicate the text on permissions
Also remove some related statements that don't seem to be correct.

docs/frontend-protocol.rst, after:


.. _frontend-protocol:

The ``fowld`` Frontend Protocol
================================

**Target Audience**: users of ``fowld`` (integrators, GUI authors, experimenters)

The ``fowld`` program speaks a line-based protocol on stdin and stdout.

Our intent is to allow any language to use and experiment with Dilation via local streaming interfaces; if a feature for your use-case is missing please `open a new Issue <https://github.com/meejah/fowl/issues/new>`_.

Every message is a single line, terminated with a single newline (``\n``) character.
Every message is a complete and valid JSON message, encoded in UTF8.
Every message is a ``dict`` (aka "JSON object").

Thus, controller programs can deserialize each line as a ``dict`` (or mapping, or your language's equivalent).

Since ``fowl`` itself uses ``fowld`` under the hood, this project has examples of parsing and producing these messages.

We now go over the keys that particular messages have.


The ``"kind"`` Key
--------------------

Every single message MUST have a ``"kind"`` key.
This tells the parser what sort of message it is (and hence what other keys may be present).

It is a protocol error to emit a message without a ``"kind"`` key.
Hereafter, we refer to all messages by their "kind".

An "input" message is one that ``fowld`` accepts on stdin.

An "output" message is one that ``fowld`` may produce on stdout.

To follow along in the code, see the ``fowl.messages`` package.
Types derived from ``FowlOutputMessage`` are produced on stdout and ``FowlCommandMessage`` derived types are accepted on stdin.


Input: ``kind: allocate-code``
------------------------------

This message tells ``fowld`` to allocate a fresh code.
These codes look like ``1-foo-bar`` (you can control how many words).
Note that we interact with the server to reserve the "nameplate" (the short number) but the words are chosen locally (and randomly).

Keys allowed:

- ``code-length`` (optional): how many words to use

After issuing this command, at some point in the future a ``kind: code-allocated`` message will be emitted.


Input: ``kind: set-code``
-------------------------

Tell ``fowld`` a specific code to use.
This likely came from a corresponding use of ``kind: allocate-code`` (in another instance of ``fowld`` on another computer).

- ``code`` (required): the secret code to use


Input: ``kind: local``
----------------------

This message asks ``fowld`` to start listening on a local port -- any subsequent connections on this local port cause the *remote* side to open a corresponding connection (possibly on a different port or protocol).

Keys allowed in this message:

- ``listen`` (required): a Twisted server-style endpoint string specifying where to listen locally
- ``connect`` (required): a Twisted client-style endpoint string specifying what connection to open on the other end

For example:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "kind": "local",
        "listen": "tcp:8000:interface=localhost",
        "connect": "tcp:localhost:80"
    }

In this example, we will open a listener on our machine on TCP port ``8000`` and interface ``localhost``.
Whenever a new connection is opened on our machine, we will ask the other side to connect to port ``80`` on *their* notion of ``localhost``.

Remember that these can be anything that Twisted understands, including from installed plugins.
**Be careful**: a malicious "other end" could cause all sorts of shenanigans.

You are only limited to streaming endpoints (i.e. no UDP) but they do not have to be TCP.
For example, one side could use ``unix:/tmp/socket`` to open a listener (or connection) on Unix-domain socket.
With `txtorcon <https://meejah.ca/projects/txtorcon>`_ one could have ``onion:...`` Tor endpoints on either end.

Once the listener is established, we'll issue a ``kind: listening`` output.


Input: ``kind: remote``
-----------------------

This will cause ``fowld`` to request a listener on the *other* side.
There is symmetry here: the same thing could be accomplished by that other side instead issuing a ``kind: local`` request.

Keys allowed in this message:

- ``listen`` (required): a Twisted server-style endpoint string specifying where to listen (on the other end).
- ``connect`` (required): a Twisted client-style endpoint string specifying what to connect to (on this side) for each connection that happens on the other side.

To directly mirror the example from the ``local`` command:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "kind": "remote",
        "listen": "tcp:8000:interface=localhost",
        "connect": "tcp:localhost:80"
    }

This will be a mirror-image of the other example.
That is, we'll cause the far end to start listening on its TCP port ``8000`` on interface ``localhost``.
Any connection to that will open a near-side connection to port 80 via TCP.

The far-side ``fowld`` will issue a ``kind: listening`` message (on its side) when it has started listening.


Input: ``kind: grant-permission``
---------------------------------

Each peer needs to have the ability to control what sorts of listeners are opened, and what sort of client-style connections are opened from its network interfaces.

The wire protocol spoken between Peers has the opportunity to approve or deny every listener, and every connection.
These are known as the "permissions" hooks in the state-machine.

When `fowld` starts, with no other option, no listeners and no connections will be allowed.

Messages can be sent to expand what is allowed.
Only "``localhost``" (or ``::1``) interfaces (or destinations) are allowed.

There are two kinds of policy: "listen" policy and "connect" policy.
These apply to the two kinds of things we may care about: a new listener (governed by the "listen" policy) or a new forwarded connection that needs to open a new client-stype connection (governed by the "connect" policy).

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "kind": "grant-permission",
        "listen": [8080],
        "connect": [443, 4321]
    }

This will allow a listener on port 8080 (whether initiated remotely or locally), and allow connections to ``localhost:443`` and ``localhost:4321`` for any incoming forwarded connections.

This is a simple, easy-to-use API but does not reveal all that is possible technically; if the above doesn't fit your use-case, please get in touch by `creating a new Issue <>_`.


Input: ``kind: danger-disable-permission-check``
------------------------------------------------

To facilitate experimentation or other use-cases not available via any other permission API, checking can be turned off entirely.

.. DANGER::

   Please understand the implications before enabling this, especially if you do not control both peer computers.
   This allows the OTHER peer to open any listener or any connection they like on your machine -- very useful, but easily abused if either side is malicious in any way.

If you understand that you want this anyway for your side of the connection, send this message

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "kind": "danger-disable-permission-check",
    }


Output: ``kind: listening``
---------------------------

This message is issued by ``fowld`` when it has opened a listening socket on that side.

So, if a ``kind: local`` had initiated the listening, this message would appear on that same side.
If instead it was a ``kind: remote`` then it would appear on the far side.

An example message:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "kind": "listening",
        "listen": "tcp:8080:interface=localhost",
        "connect": "tcp:80"
    }

Guidance for UX: the user should be made aware their machine is listening on a particular port / interface.


Output: ``kind: error``
-----------------------

Some sort of error has happened.

This message MUST have a ``message`` key containing a free-form error message.

An example message:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "kind": "error",
        "message": "Unknown control command: foo"
    }

Guidance for UX: most errors are probably interesting to the user.


Output: ``kind: welcome``
------------------------

This message is emitted to both sides once per session when we connect to the Mailbox Server.

- ``"welcome"``: a ``dict`` containing whatever the Mailbox server sent in its Welcome message.

Guidance for UX: the user should be informed that progress has been made (e.g. the Mailbox Server is available).


Output: ``kind: code-allocated``
--------------------------------

This is emitted once ``fowld`` has a secret code.
We could have been given one with ``kind: set-code`` or created a new one with ``kind: allocate-code``.
In either case, this message is emitted.

- ``"code"``: the secret code


Output: ``kind: peer-connected``
--------------------------------

The ``fowld`` process has successfully communicated with the other peer.

  - ``"verifier"``: a string containing 32 hex-encoded bytes which are a hash of the session key
  - ``"versions"``: an object containing application-specific versioning information

Guidance for UX: advanced users may wish to compare the verifiers for extra security (they should match; if they don't, it may be a "Machine in the Middle" attack).

Guidance for integration: the "versions" metadata is intended to allow your application to determine information about the peer.
This could be use for capability discovery, protocol selection, or anything else.


Output: ``kind: bytes-in``
--------------------------

The ``fowld`` process received some forwarded bytes successfully.

Keys present:

- ``id`` (required): the sub-connection id, a unique number
- ``bytes`` (required): how many bytes are forwarded recently

Guidance for UX: the user may be curious to know if a connection is alive, what its throughput is, etc.


Output: ``kind: bytes-out``
---------------------------

The ``fowld`` process forwarded some bytes to the other peer successfully.

Keys present:

- ``id`` (required): the sub-connection id, a unique number
- ``bytes`` (required): how many bytes are forwarded recently

Guidance for UX: the user may be curious to know if a connection is alive, what its throughput is, etc.


Output: ``kind: local-connection``
----------------------------------

We have received a connection on one of our local listeners.

Keys present:

- ``id`` (required): the sub-connection id, a unique number

Guidance for UX: the user should be informed that something is interacting with our listener.


Output: ``kind: incoming-connection``
-------------------------------------

The other side has asked us to make a local connection.

Keys present:

- ``id`` (required): the sub-connection id, a unique number
- ``endpoint`` (required): the Twisted client-style endpoint we will attempt a connection to

Guidance for UX: the user should be informed that something is interacting with our listener.
